[Music]
[Applause]
thank you
good evening good evening and welcome
welcome to perimeters stood here in
Waterloo Ontario Canada and welcome to
this perimeters public lecture series my
name is Greg dick and it is a pleasure
to welcome those of you here in in the
theater and to our online audience and
first before we begin in the spirit of
understanding and learning from what has
come before perimeter respectfully
acknowledges that we are located on the
traditional territory of the a Diwan
from the ocean avec and the jota Shoni
people's perimeter is situated on the
Haldeman tract land promised to Six
Nations which includes six miles on
either side of the Grand River and for
those of you watching online you can
follow us on social media we're at
perimeter and use hashtag P I live and
you can follow an engage in conversation
with scientists behind their keyboards
during the talk and if you want to send
questions to me use hashtag P I live as
well and I'll have those questions ready
to go for our presenter at the end and
now it is my pleasure to introduce
tonight's very special guest speaker dr.
Brian Gaines ler dr. Gaines Lee received
his PhD from the University of Sydney
and subsequently held positions at MIT
the Smithsonian Harvard and Sydney
before taking his current role as the
director of the Dunlop Institute for
astronomy and astrophysics at the
University of Toronto as the director of
the Dunlop Institute in Toronto
professor Gaines their aims to develop
new approaches to astronomy while also
training the next generation of
astronomers he is a Canada Research
Chair of astronomy at the Department of
astronomy and astrophysics at the
University of Toronto and the director
of the Canadian initiative for radio
astronomy data analysis dr. Gaines ler
is co-chair of both the Canadian
astronomy long-range plans 2020 and the
Toronto initiative for diversity and
excellence in his spare time he
co-authored 400 scientific papers on
cosmic magnetism neutron stars supernova
explosions and interstellar gas and
wrote a popular astronomy book called
extreme cosmos which has been translated
into six languages tonight dr. Gaines
lair will share the latest thinking on
insert on interstellar travel and the
search for alien life and how the
research may be even more exciting
than the stories in our imagination
ladies and gentlemen please welcome dr.
Brian Gaines allure
thank you so much for that welcome Greg
and thank you to all of you for coming
out here on this chilly night it's such
a pleasure to be here
as you've heard from Greg I've had the
privilege to work all over the world and
let me assure you that the premier
Institute is something really unique and
really special we are so lucky to have
this place here in Waterloo and here in
Canada and I'm thrilled to have been
invited and to have a chance to tell my
story here so so the very short version
of my talk for for those of you watching
that on YouTube you don't want to sit
here for an hour is that warp drive and
Aliens well I'm gonna I'm going to give
you a spoiler
we don't have warp drive yet and we
haven't found the aliens yet but there
are very exciting prospects for the
future if you love science fiction then
be patient and you will see your wildest
dreams hopefully start to become real so
I'm an astronomer and I love saying
those three words so I'm gonna say it
again I am an astronomer and I love
saying that because I decided that I
wanted to be an astronomer when I was
about five years old and I've never
wanted to do anything else
and if I could go back in time to that
five year old and tell him guess what
you got to be an astronomer and it
really is awesome I just cannot imagine
how happy that would make him feel so
it's the only thing I've ever wanted to
do and it's just a thrill to know that I
am getting to actually do that so why
did I decide to become an astronomer
well my parents bought me a lot of books
I love to read and it kept me quiet so
they bought me lots of books and I loved
the books that my parents got me they
got me books on dinosaurs and books on
volcanoes and books on racecar engines
and I just devoured them and I loved the
fact that they all full of facts and
they had answers to everything but then
they got me this book that was quite
different this book here I still have
this book the album of astronomy and
this book just totally changed my life
because while all the other books were
full of answers and that was great
because I liked learning about these
things this book was different instead
of having answers it was full of
questions it was basically saying we
don't know what is going on in the
universe there are so many mysteries and
we just cannot figure it out
and this was incredibly exciting to me
for a few reasons first until that point
I was only five I thought that there was
no such thing as a fad as a question
that people did not know the answer to
that like humans some someone would know
the answer to everything so I figured
that when that my parents probably knew
pretty much everything of course when I
was fifteen I knew that was totally
wrong but at five-o I thought I did in
it for some reason my my parents didn't
know the answer then my teacher would
know the answer and if unimaginably my
teacher did not know the answer then you
know back in the 1970s we had these
things called libraries and encyclopedia
and I could look it up in encyclopedia
and the answer would be there but what
this book told me is that there are some
questions that nobody on the planet
knows the answer to and that blew my
mind but the even better things that
said but there are these people who
figure out the answers to these
questions and they're called astronomers
and these astronomers take things from
that we have no idea column and after a
lot of hard work and brilliance they
move them into the oh yeah we know what
that is column and I thought oh my gosh
that is what I want to do what's great
when I look at this book now forty or
forty-five years on is that the big big
mysteries the we would give both our
arms to answer their answers to these
questions mysteries of the 1970s and now
just mundane thing the answers are in
every textbook these are not even
remotely mysterious anymore all of those
big mysteries have been completely
answered 40 years on but now we have
these huge mysteries in astronomy like
what is dark energy what are fast radio
bursts these massive mysteries that we
didn't even know what the question was
back then and now they're huge mysteries
in astronomy and so I love the fact that
you know we go from answering a question
to asking a question to answering a
question and then coming up with totally
new questions and this process is
happening all the time
just to prove to you about what a
hardcore astronomer I was at a very
early age I'm gonna show you a picture
from from about 1980 when my parents and
I went to the equivalent of the Canadian
National Exhibition I grew up in
Australia so we obviously didn't have
the Canadian National Exhibition in
Australia instead we had something
called the Royal Easter Show which is
pretty much the same sort of thing and
there was a cartoonist there who said I
will draw a caricature caricature of you
for $5.00 and I said I'm um dad please
please can I have five dollars to have a
picture drawn on me and they said okay
here's five bucks and I sat down with
the cartoonist and they said why don't I
draw you doing what you're going to be
when you grow up what do you want to be
when you grow up and I guess they're
expecting me to say fire fighter or
airline pilot or all the usual things
that little kids say and I said I want
to be an astronomer and she said uh okay
and she drew me as an astronomer and
Here I am so you can see that I look
exactly the same
the only difference now is that my
telescope is a whole lot bigger but I'm
very fortunate to still have this
cartoon from all these years ago because
it reminded me of just how passionate I
was about astronomy back then and
nothing has changed so I love being an
astronomer and I love astronomy but the
only other thing that matches my passion
for astronomy is my passion for science
fiction so as science fiction is a bit
of a touchy topic for astronomers half
I'm going to grossly generalize here but
half of astronomers lover and half of
them hate it and the reasons why they
love it and the reasons why they hate it
are exactly the same it's because it
breaks the rules astronomy is part of
physics and physics has these beautiful
laws that govern that explain everything
from you know a butterfly to a distance
they all follow the same rules so some
people really don't like science fiction
because they say look I've spent decades
training to understand these rules you
can't just go off and then you know make
a movie where you just cheat and other
people love science fiction cuts look I
spent all day at work strictly following
the rules when I get home I just want to
let my hair down and break some rules
and so I fall a lot a category I love
science fiction because you know I know
that
the things in science fiction are
impossible and they break the laws of
physics but you know it's sort of that
the rebellious part of me saying what if
but apart from that there's two reasons
why I love science fiction the first is
that in a very profound way
science fiction casts new light on what
it means to be human if you read a good
book or watch a good movie not not a
science fiction story but just a normal
movie often the reason why it's
enjoyable is because you're seeing how
human beings react to complicated
emotional challenging situations and
science fiction takes that to another
level it puts humans in situations that
you could never that you couldn't could
never happen in you know the crown or
downtown Downton Abbey but far more
futuristic complicated situations that
we're never going to experience on in
everyday life and you can ask how do
people respond to that so this is one of
my favorite movies the last few years
the movie arrival and so Amy Adams plays
a linguist and she is reacting in this
very complicated way to the fact that
she has encountered aliens who look and
think completely different from us and
she's trying to work out how to
communicate to them if you haven't seen
this movie it's a very good movie very
powerful emotional movie about being a
parent and about memory and about life
and death but it's all in the context of
aliens landing and trying to talk to us
and the questions that are asked in this
movie are not questions that you could
answer in just a contemporary piece set
in Waterloo in the year 2020 unless you
bring in the aliens so so I love science
fiction because it allows us to ask
important questions about the human
condition and the other thing I love
about science fiction is a lot of it
it's about technology and as we know
technology changes our lives completely
in many complicated ways and it's going
to continue to do so and so science
fiction steps forward maybe five years
or 10 years or 20 years and ask
questions ahead how are these new
technological changes going to change
our life for better or for worse so
here's another recent science fiction
show West world where you know there are
these high-tech robots that are
basically indistinguishable from humans
and we and it explores in a very
complicated way you know what does it
mean to be a living thing what does it
mean to have emotions or feelings or
thought and you know can
robots be sentient so these are
questions that we'll probably have to
address in real life in 10 or 20 years
but science fiction lets us ask those
questions right now and prepares us for
the future
so there's fat and there's science
fiction and some people think that
they're completely separate and they
have nothing to say about each other and
I'm one of those people who thinks that
they're very intertwined so if we even
look up what astronomers are talking
about and thinking about it can get a
little bit hard to tell the difference
between science and science fiction so
let's look at some of the highlights of
my field of astronomy over the last
couple of years so one of the you know
who could have thought this could
possibly have happened moments happened
about two or three years ago when we had
the very first interstellar visitor from
another star that we've ever been aware
of it's not wasn't a night it wasn't
aliens but you know what not the sort of
visitor we might hope for it was a rock
an asteroid and that drifted past the
earth and it caught attention because
you know there are lots of asteroids
that we see all the time but they're all
orbiting the Sun and this one was at a
very severe angle at a very high speed
such that it can't have been in orbit
around the Sun it was coming from
somewhere else and it approached the Sun
at very high speed whipped around you
know the Sun's gravity and then zoomed
off out into interstellar space never to
be seen again we gave it the name in
Mulla Mulla and we believe that this
rock was actually used to be an asteroid
in some other solar system maybe on the
other side of the galaxy and for tens or
hundreds of millions of years has been
whizzing across the great across the
galaxy and just by sheer luck happened
to a drift and trial solar system
before flying off again so that alone is
amazing the first time we've ever seen
any object come into the solar system
from outside of the solar system but
what's more when we measured its shape
it wasn't like a normal a steroid most
asteroids are so lumpy you know vaguely
around was sort of lumps and bumps on
them but you can see here that a Muammer
was very different it was mold shaped
like a cigar it was dark and extremely
long about ten times longer than it is
why then that's a very strange shape
so a lot of scientists were saying you
know who could have thought of this this
is like beyond science fiction but if
you're a science fiction fan you know
that this is not beyond science fiction
we've seen this before probably the most
well known time we've seen this is in
the movie Star Trek for the voyage home
that's the one where they go back to the
1980s and save the whales but this
indeed exactly like in real life a dark
cigar like alien probe comes from
outside the solar system and travels to
earth and interstellar visitor that
looks remarkably like a murmur and even
Star Trek wasn't the first to come up
with this back in 1973 arthur c clarke
wrote a novel called rendezvous with
Rama one of the great science fiction
novels of all time they haven't made it
into a movie yet but they really really
should and this one the plot is
remarkably similar to real-life a
cylindrical dark asteroid comes flying
in from outer space on a very severe
orbit and swings around the Sun once and
then flies off before it does they check
it out and it turns out that it's
actually an alien space probe so the
moon war is not telling us to save the
whales and it's not an alien space probe
but it's remarkable how science fiction
actually anticipated the idea of this
dark strangely elongated interstellar
visitor so all right science fiction
beat us to the punch on that one but
come on like there's been so many
discoveries lately there must be other
ones that are that completely blow
science fiction out of the water so one
of the unquestionable discoveries of
2019 in fact most science magazines
ranked this the number one breakthrough
of 2019 was a spectacular image of a
black hole so this is not an artist's
impression or some clever sort of
computer over interpretation this is an
actual picture of a black hole and it
was people here at the Prudy Institute
Avery Avery Broderick and others that
were absolutely instrumental in making
this image so this is a black hole it's
55 million light years away the
sharpness of vision here is ridiculous
it's the same sharpness of vision that
you if you if someone was sitting in New
York reading a newspaper and you were in
Paris this sharpness of vision is the
same as being in Paris and having having
a telescope good enough to read a
newspaper in New York so it's a really
remarkable breakthrough you know it
doesn't get any better than making
actual picture of a black hole but won't
surprise you you know that you know I
think you know no offense to our
hard-working scientists here at the
premier Institute but the black holes in
science fiction you know they look much
better than this
has anybody signed up yet for Disney
Plus like hands up have you joined
Disney Plus anybody a few of you have
you yet watch that a classic brilliant
piece piece of art the 1979 Disney movie
the black hole is anyone watch that I
saw it when it came out in 1979 and I
watched it a couple of weeks ago again
and you know what it's still pretty good
movie so here is a still from Disney's
the black hole go out and and watch it
if you can this is before I guess before
Disney had the budget they had now this
is actually a pool of water being
stirred in a Plexiglas tank with dye
added to it but even so you know I said
no offense but it actually looks better
than the real thing
but that's actually not what black holes
probably look like what you're seeing
here if you could crank up the
resolution even more and make a sharper
vision which is which is what
astronomers are now trying to do you
should see something like this and this
so this is a clip from interstellar and
this was based on actual astronomical
calculations made by nobel prize when he
Kip Thorne using a supercomputer of what
a black hole would look like up close
[Music]
all right so so that's Matthew
McConaughey about to narrowly avoid
destruction a black hole but with almost
no artistic license at all that's pretty
much what a black hole really looks like
as far as we can tell and in the coming
years we'll get sharper and sharper
pictures of the real thing and it will
start to look like that
I guess one big difference between
science and science fiction is how we
name things this object's name is m87
star and the one here is called
gargantuan so I don't know which which
black hole you'd rather be sucked into
but I'd far more like the drive into
gargantuan that I wouldn't m87 stars
okay so clearly science fiction was
thought of everything
but I did think of one thing that to the
best of my knowledge has not been
anticipated in science fiction there
might be some science fiction fans here
in the audience or online and if if you
know some sci-fi that predicted this
then please let me know I'm happy to be
corrected but in August of 2017
something remarkable happened involving
things called neutron stars so neutron
stars are these some of the strangest
stars in the universe they weigh more
than the mass of the Sun but they're
only the size of kitchener-waterloo
they're like 25 30 kilometers across but
they weigh more than the mass of the Sun
so that some of the densest objects in
the universe and if you think one
neutron star is pretty incredible we'll
imagine two of them orbiting each other
and then crashing into each other and
that's what we saw in August of 2017 so
here's an artist's impression of what we
saw two neutron stars spiraling in
faster and faster and then eventually
coalescing possibly forming a black hole
and creating a spectacular explosion
well we didn't see the moment of the
explosion itself because we didn't know
it was about to happen this explosion
actually was so violent that it made the
entire universe shake it's like the
granddaddy of all earthquakes so we live
that universe is a mixture of space and
time space time and the actual fabric of
space-time itself vibrated across the
entire universe when these two neutron
stars merged and we actually felt that
happen you and I didn't feel that happen
you weren't sitting there eating a
sandwich on that day and think Oh what
was that
but we
have the vibration was tiny it was like
smaller than diameter of an atom but we
have these incredibly sensitive
instruments one in Washington and one in
Louisiana called LIGO and they detected
the vibration from these two neutron
stars merging and literally the entire
universe shook for a few seconds after
that which is quite extraordinary as I
said I'm pretty sure that this is one
thing that didn't turn up in science
fiction before it happened in real life
but if you know better I'd be happy to
be corrected
okay so science fiction is normally
ahead of the game and you know given
that my talk is on Ward Drive and aliens
it's not going to be a shock to you to
tell you that science fiction is ahead
of the game here too so warp drive is
really all about traveling from one
place to another quickly we know that
stars are unbelievably far away the
nearest star to us is 40 trillion
kilometers away
so getting from one star to another is
not super practical and in science
fiction you sort of want people to be
able to go to other stars to travel
around and have adventures so you have
to have some some cheat some way of
getting from one star to another and
normally science fiction doesn't worry
about the details too much they just
invent warp drive or hyper drive or
something and that's just a convenient
way of getting from A to B so in in the
movies it's super easy to travel from
one star to the other so here's a scene
from Return of the Jedi
Admiral Ackbar may he rest in peace and
here we go traveling from one star to
another
[Music]
so easy and they pop out pop out two
seconds later and they're at another
star system so of course in real life
I'm not giving away anything to tell you
it's not that simple so if we want to be
able to you know live the life of
science-fiction and travel to other
stars how might we actually do it so
old-school science-fiction is you have a
rocket ship so here's a real rocket ship
and here's a science-fiction version
could you build a rocket ship and use it
to travel to another star so the short
answer is not really the way the Space
Shuttle worked is it has it's full of
fuel and you light that fuel and you get
a massive explosion you direct the
explosion out the back and the gas flows
out that way and you get a reaction if
you push the gas up that way you go that
way okay so it's very simple
brute force technology and it pushes the
space shuttle up into space now the
space shuttle is really really big who's
actually seen the space shuttle at one
of the museum's anyone's seen it it's
huge right and if have any of you been
to the one in Florida where they
actually had the boosters as well anyone
been to Cape Canaveral it these boosters
are even bigger than the space shuttle
so you get a feeling you've got this
massive multi-story building just full
of rocket fuel and that's what you need
to launch the space shuttle but the
space shuttle and this is sort of a bit
embarrassing because it's not really a
space shuttle it doesn't really it
barely goes into space the space shuttle
only went up 300 kilometers that's not
even from here to Ottawa so it's a very
short distance and that you needed all
this incredible fuel just to get 300
kilometers above the Earth's surface so
you still haven't even escaped from the
Earth's gravity let alone escape the Sun
let alone travel to another star so even
if you could build a rocket that you
that had everything you needed on it to
travel to another star and you built the
fastest rocket that's ever been built it
would take about 20,000 years to get
even to the nearest ER so not only does
that not make for great TV on a science
fiction movie
it's obviously not very practical if you
want to travel 20,000 years that's you
know many many generations you'll need
thousands of people and food and
radiation shielding and school
and all the rest of it you're gonna have
a spaceship beside bigger than a cruise
ship and that's just not practical if
you really cut everything down to the
bare bare bare minimum you could pass
the calculations have been done that you
could build a very small hyped up
superpower rocket that could get to the
nearest star in 900 years it's still a
pretty long time and there's a few
problems with that firstly that's to get
to the star but of course you're
travelling very fast when you get to
that star and you've used up all your
fuel so you have no way of slowing down
so you finally get the star it's like
bye and that's the end of that so not
very practical but even that would take
900 years and what's more you'd need
more matter than there is in the entire
solar system to do it and so you can
imagine how big the rocket boosters
would have to be so while I love
pictures like this it's just simply not
never going to be a practical way of
travelling between stars just the amount
of fuel you need is just completely
impractical so let's look at options
that don't require so much fuel there's
another alternative called the ion drive
it sounds like science fiction but it's
actually real and it simply involves
using electricity like a battery or
something even nuclear-powered or solar
powered electricity to slowly evaporate
a lump of fuel and gently blow out your
fuel at the other end so you use much
less fuel but you shoot out the
individual ions much much faster and so
this is an artist's impression of a
satellite probe called dawn that was
used by NASA and it visited two
asteroids Vesta and serese-- and it
traveled six point nine billion
kilometres over eleven years and it
traveled that six point nine billion
kilometers using only 400 kilograms of
fuel so that's nothing like that's it
the big block of fuel about this big
they use xenon so just a big tank of
xenon gas weighing 400 kilograms which
is not that much compared to the space
shuttle and that's all it needed to
travel billions of kilometers over 11
years and if you think that sort of
looks too good to be true like this just
looks like its artistic license and
there's nothing really like that here's
a photograph of an ion drive in the lab
and it looked exactly like the artists
impression so these things actually work
and they've actually been many
satellites now that have flown around
the solar system using the
ion drives the problem with the ion
drive is that it's really really weak
it's a very gentle thrust so if you're
shopping to buy a fancy car or Porsche
or a Lamborghini it might be important
to you to know how fast it takes to go
from zero to 100 and the most expensive
cars that you can buy these days go from
0 to 100 and a little less than 3
seconds so if you walk through the
showroom and point to the NASA dawn and
said what can I get out of this baby
well the answer might disappoint you
because it goes from 0 to 100 in 4 days
so the acceleration is really really
weak it takes a long time to get up to
speed so that's the price you pay for
not having to need much fuel is you
don't get a lot of oomph out of it and
so if you tried to use the ion drive to
travel to another star even to the
nearest star it would take you 80
thousand years to get there again not
very practical there's another problem
as I said the ion drive is super weak so
you could not put this thing on the
ground and say ready for takeoff three
two one go nothing would happen it's too
weak to escape the Earth's gravity so
you still need all of those rocket
boosters to get it out of the Earth's
orbit and only then can you turn on the
ion drive so this is probably not a very
practical solution either what about if
we get rid of the engine completely and
use an energy source that isn't attached
to the spacecraft could this solve our
problems so this has been thought of too
it's been around in science fiction for
a very long time
and the idea is to use what are called
solar sails and the theory here is that
the Sun actually is blowing off this
gentle wind in every direction the solar
wind that's traveling at quite a high
speed these flow of particles in every
direction so as long as you want to
travel away from the Sun and not towards
it you simply have to unfurl a big sail
and it will fill up just like the sail
of a ship and you'll be blown away from
the Sun and just like a sailor you can
use various tricks tacking and all the
rest of it if you don't want to travel
directly away so here is a solar sail
being used by Count Dooku and Star Wars
Attack of the Clones and here is sort of
the classical old-school 1950s science
fiction version of a solar sail so could
we use a solar sail to sail
the solar system on the sun's wind and
the answer is well maybe there's also
memory the problem I mentioned before is
having to slow down when you get to the
other star well it's perfect you use the
sun's solar wind to sail halfway to the
so you're going to then you turn the
whole thing around and you use the wind
of the other star to to slow down and
then you go to a gentle stop when you
want to go there so people are actually
working on this technology here is a
spacecraft called light sail - that was
developed by the Planetary Society the
space probe itself is really really tiny
it's just in there it's only about this
big but the sail is huge it's about 30
square meters or about 350 square feet
so this thing was actually launched
about six months ago here it is this is
a photograph from the probe so you can
see this is Baja California down here in
Mexico in the United States this is the
probe and here is the actual solar sail
unfurling so this was in June of last
year so of course the big question is
does this actually work and the answer
is yes it does
so left they unfolded the sail and they
measured whether the sun's wind actually
pushed this satellite into a new orbit
but the results are not exactly
spectacular so this is before they
unfurled the sail it was seven hundred
and twenty five point six kilometers
above the Earth's surface they opened
the sail right here
not much happen for a few days but then
very gently the solar wind pushed it to
seven hundred and twenty seven
kilometers above the Earth's surface so
this is the first time anyone's really
done this and it did work it raised the
orbit of this spacecraft by one point
eight kilometers you want to start
somewhere so clearly we have a very very
long way to go here there's lots more
technology we have to develop in order
to be able to use solar sails and the
sails are going to have to be much
bigger they got to be hundreds of
kilometers across and then you have the
whole technological problem how do you
pack the sail up when you launch the
thing how do you unfurl it how do you
spin the thing around what happens if
like a meteorite rips a hole in it
there's all sorts of huge challenges but
if you can work out how long it would
take to get to near a star using solar
sailing and the answer isn't actually
too bad it's only 75 years
now that's still a long time it's you
know you're not going if you start as a
young man or woman at the beginning
you're probably not going to be alive at
the end of it
but 75 years were actually starting to
get into the right ballpark
unfortunately there's really no way to
go any faster you can't you know crank
up the sound or crank down the Sun the
Sun is the Sun and it gives out wind at
a particular speed but there is at least
a way that you know is it is not
completely science fiction because we're
it works over 1.8 kilometers we just
have to get working over 40 trillion
kilometers and we are in business and we
can travel to another star using no fuel
at all in 75 years but maybe we should
be thinking outside the box and thinking
a bit harder well there are some other
options one that comes up a lot is this
idea of something called the emdrive or
the Mach effect thruster then anyone see
this show last year's salvation you want
to see this probably you're probably not
admitting you want to see because it was
really bad
filmed here in Toronto though and there
was a lot of Technology in it and one of
them was this idea of this emdrive
and the idea here is a little bit
hand-wavy it you you inject microwaves
into this cavity and they bounce around
but they bounce around they bounce out
fast slightly faster at one end than the
other and you get a tiny amount of
thrust the only problem is is that you
really you know the laws of physics say
that you can't get something for nothing
and most people including me think that
this breaks the laws of physics people
have claimed that it does produce a
thrust but other people have rebuilt the
same experiment and haven't been able to
produce it so this is probably complete
fiction but you know if we can somehow
get this to work then it does perhaps
maybe if you don't mind breaking a few
laws of physics produce a tiny tiny tiny
amount of thrust so you know can this go
fast enough no does it work no does it
abate the laws of physics no but you
never know okay are there other options
again let's think outside the box
maybe you shouldn't travel there at all
wouldn't it be easy to get to on a star
if you simply look at me you break me up
into pieces I've got an arm and some
here and some feet you pack all that up
you transmit that information to the
other star and then you put me back at
the other end that's all an email is
right I mean if I send you an email the
Kiester it's not the key it's the
keyboard doesn't get sent over to you
the computer records what the keystrokes
are it remembers the order I typed them
in and it puts back that information at
the other end over the Internet and you
get the message that I sent you so you
know this has a technical name it's
called teleportation and maybe this is a
way to get from one star to another so
no rocket fuel is need at all you just
have to break me apart into pieces and
beam a signal and put me back at the
other end and of course this has been a
staple of science fiction since forever
and of course that the most famous
example will have teleportation of
course is in Star Trek
[Music]
okay so in that case they're probably
only teleported over a few hundred or a
few thousand kilometers but if it works
over a few thousand kilometers why can't
it just work from one star to the other
so the good news is that teleportation
is real the bad news is at the moment we
can only teleport one atom at a time but
in Israel and it's called quantum
teleportation in real life if you want
to look it up and the record for
teleportation at the moment involving
one atom is teleporting over 14-hundred
over a distance of 1,400 kilometers it
was a Chinese satellite call me kiyose
and they take teleport they teleported
an atom from the ground up to the
satellite
so the actual after I've never moved all
you do is you take one atom and you
measure its exact properties and by
measure in the process of measuring its
properties you actually mess it up and
you lose that information but you can
transmit that state to the to the
spacecraft and you can recreate an atom
exactly the same so the atom at the end
is AI is indistinguishable from the atom
at the beginning tolerance to intents
and purposes it's teleportation turned
out to be really useful it's really
important in cryptography and sending
uncrackable signals which is very
important in finance and banking and all
the rest of it but can can this be used
to teleport humans well probably no and
probably not ever there's there's a few
caches to this in terms of using for
interstellar travel the first is that
you need a receiving station so you've
got to get your receiving station to
where you want to teleport to first so
if you want to visit the nearest star by
a teleportation you've got to get a
receiving station to the nearest star
first and then you go back to all the
problems I just discussed that has to
get there through the normal means but
once you've done that you're in business
and you don't just simply have to scan
every aspect every atom of a human being
and transmit that and that's a bit of a
problem because you can calculate just
how many how much data you need to
describe a human being an exact copy you
really want to be exact copy right you
don't want to teleport there and
discover something important missing so
the amount of data you need to scan one
human is 300 million
and trillion trillion gigabytes that's
that's three with 32 zeros at the end of
it gigabytes so that's that's you know a
lot of memory sticks and then if you
work out well okay now you have to
transmit with a radio signal you have to
actually send that signal to that's
there well at the highest data rates
that we have at the moment it would take
you five thousand trillion years to
transmit that information which is
360,000 times the age of the universe so
it would actually be quicker to walk to
the nearest star than to teleport
so I'd say there are significant
barriers to that teleportation does not
violate the laws of physics unbelievably
it doesn't we can do it but the
practicalities of transmitting even a
single human being are absolutely
enormous so I don't think we'll be
teleporting anytime soon
all of these methods also suffer from
something else and that's another catch
is that you can go really slow and it
can take you a thousand years or
whatever if you could figure out using
one of these methods going really really
fast suppose you could build a rocket
ship that could travel at half the speed
of light or 80% of the speed of light or
90% of speed of light you'll get there
faster but you then have another problem
and that's something called time
dilation it's a consequence of
Einstein's special theory of relativity
and what it says is that when you go
really fast
your clock runs slower than the rest of
the universe and time dilation hasn't
come up too much that's that been really
super nerdy science fiction so you have
to dive really deep to find it until
Matthew McConaughey malong and saved the
day as he always does in the movie
interstellar we see time dilation
Matthew McConaughey as a young daughter
he goes off gallivanting around the
galaxy and visits black holes and all
the rest of it but despite being an
advanced NASA astronaut didn't seem to
know about time dilation he must have
been sick that day because he's rather
surprised when he comes back to earth
and you know a month has passed for him
he's still gorgeous and his young
daughter is now an old old lady and so
this is a real effect we have
demonstrated this with clocks flying
clocks at high speeds
comparing to clocks on earth and they're
very slightly different so even if you
traveled if you traveled said only half
the speed of light which you can go a
lot faster it's like a 15 percent effect
so
if you were away for say ten years
everyone who would be away for 12 but if
you want to get picked somewhere first
so if you want to go at 90% the speed of
light it becomes about a factor of two
and if you want to go at 99% of the
speed of light becomes a factor of seven
so if you went it not if you went on a
journey to other stars at 99% of the
speed of light then you might think
you're away for 10 years when you come
back 70 years surpassed so all your
friends are aged or died technologies
particularly a completely different
society is completely different your
total fish out of water so if you're
given the chance to go on interstellar
travel at high speed it might be the
trip of a lifetime but it's going to be
very lonely and confusing and strange
when you come back maybe there's one way
around all of these things and that's of
course in the title of my talk warp
drive so warp drive is a staple of
science fiction and we saw it in in the
star wars clip that I showed at the
beginning with Admiral Ackbar but it was
also a valid scientific idea and so the
idea was developed by a Mexican
physicist Miguel Alcubierre and he is
science fiction fan and but thought
about you know how could you actually do
this in real life and the idea is that
space is actually can be stretched and
squashed I can't do it just with my
hands like this for under the right
conditions you can stretch and squash
space and you can use that to actually
move from one place to the other without
using any rocket fuel at all so the idea
is that suppose I have a big rug and I
want and I put a toy car on my rug all
the way over here and I want to get that
toy car over to me standing over here so
one way I can do it is I can walk over
the toy car and I can hold it and I can
wheel it across the rug to me so that is
like a rocket ship
using up fuel but there's another way I
can do it I can put the toy cat on the
rug over there and then I can just grab
the rug and I can bunch up the rug and
pull it towards me and then the car will
eventually get to me the car as far as
it can tell has not moved at all the
wheels have not turned it hasn't had to
use any energy and yet the car has
traveled from over there to over here
and that's exactly the idea behind warp
drive except it's using actual space
instead of the carpet that's the idea is
you have some sort of spaceship it
doesn't have to
any feel at all but if you squeeze the
space ahead of it and stretch the space
behind it you can actually move it from
one part of the universe to another in
principle as fast as you want without
using up any fuel now of course you have
to use energy but the energy doesn't
have to actually be on the spaceship so
this is in principle a way of traveling
to other stars without having to worry
about time dilation or huge amounts of
fuel or anything there's only one small
problem
we have absolutely no idea how to
actually squash or stretch space-time
and if we did it would require more
energy than all the energy on earth put
together but other than that minor
detail this is theoretically possible
and you know there with something is
theoretically possible you know what
they say you know where there's a will
there's a way maybe thousands of years
from now the Alcubierre drive will
become reality okay so this has been a
bit of a downer I've told you all the
ways in which you will never visit other
stars but all hope is not lost I'm going
to finish this part of my talk by
telling you one way in which we really
might be able to visit other stars and
this is a program that is a real program
that's in its early days it's probably
only about five or ten years old called
breakthrough starshot and what
breakthrough starshot says is let's
forget humans traveling to other stars
that's not going to happen any time soon
and let's forget sending some giant
space probe to another star but what if
we had a space probe that was only this
big if you have a space probe that's
only like you know the size of a grain
of rice then it doesn't need much fuel
at all to to get to another star and
well how you can actually get it going
quite fast in lots of ways and of course
the best sounding way and the way
they're proposing to use it of course is
using giant space lasers so the idea is
is you have your giant space lasers here
they are all ready to shoot their laser
and then somewhere above into a floor
but you have a tiny little spacecraft
which is right at the center here with a
big sail around it and then you fire up
your space lasers you aim them very very
carefully and you focus them all to
exactly the right spot and they hit the
sail here we go
and accelerate this tiny little probe
after a normal speeds after 20% of the
speed of light or about 60,000
kilometers a second at that speed you
can travel the nearest star in 20 years
you can't slow down
but you fly past that start great speed
you've got just a few minutes to take a
few snapshots hopefully they're in focus
and you're pointing in the right
direction and if there's a planet there
then you get a couple of snapshots and
you beam them back to earth before
flying out into the void forever so it's
not the same as being there just getting
a few postcards but it's better nothing
and this is perhaps the only viable way
in our lifetimes we will travel to
another star as I said these space
lasers could accelerate that tiny little
spacecraft up to 20% of the speed of
light and at that speed it takes 20
years to get to nearest though you have
to wait a little bit longer than that
because the nearest star is 4 light
years away and what that means it takes
20 years for the spacecraft to get there
and then when it takes that photo and
beams it back to us using radio waves it
takes another 4 years for the signals to
get back to us but from launch to
getting the picture is about 24 years so
that's that's not too bad you know
hopefully most of us will be around in
24 years and you'd actually get to see
the results so are we ready to do this
well not quiet there's a bunch of
different problems to solve like
building giant space lasers but probably
the biggest challenge is in having that
tiny little probe and there is work
going on in this this is called a femto
satellite because we already had micro
satellites and nano satellites so we had
to go down to femto effect those
satellites this is a real satellite it's
called kick set it's about three
centimeters across and it weighs four
grams and it has all the basics of a
space probe on it it has solar power it
has a few probes to measure whatever
it's flying past and it has antennas to
transmit its signal back to earth now
this is still not something that would
be suitable for breakthrough starshot
all these electronics are exposed if you
shone a space laser onto this it would
melt but if you could develop something
that was even smaller maybe ten times
smaller and which somehow I have the
power to with a tiny little antenna to
transmit its signal from 40 trillion
kilometers away and take a photo and all
the rest of it then you might actually
have the sort of mini satellite that
could be part of this experiment but
there are more problems to solve and
that's even if you got the space laser
and you got your tiny little probe and
you accelerate it up to the 20% of the
speed of light you
have another problem and that's that
space is despite its name it's not space
at all space is not empty the galaxy the
Milky Way is full of dust and when I say
- I mean dust I mean little grains of
sort little little specks and flecks of
junk and you can see that in the night
sky if you go out on a dark night you'll
see the Milky Way but you also see these
dark patches and these dark patches are
dust clouds that are blocking out the
light from beyond you might say well you
know that's that's annoying you don't
want to fly into a dust cloud but you
know there's lots of parts of the sky
that don't have dust clouds well that's
not true these are only the very densest
darkest clouds but if you look in
infrared vision you can actually see
that the dust is everywhere so this is
another look at the sky using a
satellite called Planck that a bunch of
Canadians were very heavily involved in
and you can see that there is dust over
the entire sky so everywhere you try and
go in space there is dust now if I'm
walking through space at these speeds
that dust isn't going to bother me at
all you know I might get a bit of soot
in my throat or I have to sort of wipe
the soot off my furrowed but it's not a
big deal but if you're traveling at 20
percent of the speed of life then every
dust grain that hits you hits you at 20
percent of speed of life and even a
microscopic dust grain wearing a tiny
fraction a gram is you know a
sledgehammer when it's traveling at
twenty percent of the speed of light so
people have asked the question well what
happens when you have a mini space probe
traveling at the speed and you get hit
with the dust grain so I'm going to show
you a highly technical sophisticated
calculation so this is the before shot
dust and spacecraft and this is directly
from the scientific paper you get bad
words where bad words like crater and
molten matter so if this tiny little
satellite gets hit by a dust grain is a
fair chance that the satellite will get
vaporized so how do you get around this
problem well there's a few ways one is
you do not launch just one satellite
with your space laser they're tiny one
why not
you know don't launch one launch one
hundred thousand of them so the idea is
you have this huge cloud of these tiny
little rice grain size spacecraft and
you know if 80 or 90% of them 99% of
them get knocked out by dust grains it
doesn't matter because
only need one to get to the nearest us
the other thing is you could put
shielding around them it makes them a
bit heavier and a bit more complicated
but maybe the shielding will sort of
slowly get blasted away by the dust
grain and the spacecraft will survive or
maybe you don't make them like square
you make them like a needle shape and
that way their cross-section to the dust
is very very small so we haven't solved
this problem yet but people are thinking
about it and you know if you go back to
that fantastic vision of all these
spaceships slamming into warp-drive
maybe the reality is tiny little hair
sized space probes dodging dust grains
as they zip over to the nearest ER
alright so why don't you actually want
to go to these other stars well the
answer of course is because you want to
see if there are aliens there we want to
see if we are alone this is the you know
the biggest question we can ask it used
to be a philosophical question but
incredibly it's now a scientific
question is there anybody else out there
and of course if there is anyone else
out there we hope that they would be
intelligent and we hope that they would
be friendly like an et or The Day the
Earth Stood Still and we really hoped
that they wouldn't be mean like in War
of the Worlds or in Independence Day so
we don't know as far as we know we have
never found any life on any other planet
anywhere except our own and the reason
why it's because finding life elsewhere
is really really hard let's assume it's
not it might not be a perfect assumption
but let's assume that if there is life
out there that it comes from a planet
then maybe there's life that is an
associate of planets but you know our
life's on a planet so we have to find
other planets and that's really really
hard because planets are really really
faint and even our biggest telescopes
have trouble finding them this is a very
famous photo it's called the pale blue
dot it was taken in 1990 by a spacecraft
called Voyager 1 that as it was about to
leave the solar system just turned back
and just took one final photo back from
where it came from it's a photograph of
the Earth from a distance of 6 billion
kilometres can you see the earth it's
that one little pixel right there so
that is the planet Earth what it looks
like from 6 billion kilometres away so
it's quite sobering to realize that you
know every person who's ever born and
died every happy moment every sad moment
every sports victory every tread
every piece of music ever written
everything that anyone has ever thought
as important is all happening on that
one little pixel right there so that's
pretty faint you have to know exactly
where to look to see it and that's the
Earth from the edge of our solar system
if you went to the nearest star and
turned back and tried to take a photo of
Earth
well that's six thousand times farther
away and a physical law call the inverse
square law says that the brightness goes
as the square of the distance so if you
try and take a photo from six thousand
times farther away the earth would be 40
million times fainter than that so I
don't have to work very hard to convince
you that if you made that 40 million
times fainter you would not be able to
see it what's more if you go from far
away then you know the Sun is you know
over there somewhere but if you go
farther away then the Sun and the earth
are right next to each other and the Sun
is about five billion times brighter
than the earth so put something five
billion times brighter in the earth
there and make that millions of times
fainter and you can see that would just
be absolutely impossible to see the
earth so how do we find planets around
other stars there are a few cases where
we can actually make pictures like this
and I'll show you one later but the way
we normally do it is a sneaky technique
called the transit technique and so
these planets are on other stars are
called exoplanets and we can't see them
directly but sometimes their orbit is
alone such that the planet drifts in
front of its parent star relative to us
and when that happens we can't see this
we never see this we don't have the
sharpness of vision to see this but
there's the planet and it blocks out a
tiny amount of light from the star like
less than 1% but the star just gets
dimmer for a few minutes and then as the
planet moves off the other side the star
gets brighter again
so we just measure the brightness of
stars very very carefully look for
little dips in their brightness that are
happening at regular times and that is a
planet going around the other star and
that little dip carries an enormous
amount information and we can actually
work out the properties of these stars
so using this very simple technique we
have found thousands of these exoplanets
I looked up in the in the database this
morning of the NASA database and the
current tally is 4116 exoplanets that we
know of are in other stars and the
remarkable thing is that these planets
are so so different from our own solar
system so
this is an animation showing you this is
our own solar system so the sun's here
Mercury's orbit Venus Earth Mars Jupiter
Saturn and superimposed on that are just
some of the other exoplanets that we
know about and you can see that their
orbits most of them are much tighter
than ours and there all sorts of
different ones some are going
ridiculously fast some are going slow
but they're all different and most of
them are much smaller than our solar
system so there's lots and lots of
planets out there and they all have very
different properties from from ours so
let's go back to science fiction from
her and say what a science fiction say I
mean lots of science fiction there's a
planet just like the earth it's very
convenient for very cheap for filming
purposes this very planet looks like
California but but of course in some
science fiction there are planets that
look nothing like the earth and so you
know here are a couple of my favorites
this is Mustafar the planet at the end
of Revenge of the Sith where obi-wan
Kenobi and Anakin Skywalker have a
lightsaber battle on this lava planet
and yet this is strictly speaking is
another planet it's earth but it's it's
very science fictiony
possibly one of the worst movies ever
made Kevin Costner in Waterworld but he
lives on up he lives on a planet where
global global climate change has created
a planet with no earth no land masses at
all just water so you know in science
fiction we have lava planets and we have
water planets is there science fiction
or is this actually some basis in fact
well it turns out there aren't a lot of
planets out there that we've found yet
that look much like the earth but we
have found planets made of lava and we
have found planets that are completely
made of water these are not photographs
these are artists impressions but our
best understanding is of those or the
properties of the stars so you know the
Mustafar and water world are real there
are really lava planets and water
planets but there are things that even
science fiction hadn't dreamed up one of
the most common types of planet in the
universe are these hot Jupiters these
are systems that have a planet like
Jupiter but they're super super close to
their parent star they're like 10 times
closer to the star than mercury is to
our Sun and instead of orbiting in
months or in years they orbit in days or
even hours and sometimes they're so
close that the Saheed of the stars
actually slowly evaporating
the planet we have actually found
planets that a pity you made entirely of
diamond and perhaps one of the most
common types of planets are these
planets called super Earths their
planets that you know are perhaps about
the same temperature as Earth and maybe
have the same conditions but they're
much much bigger so here is Earth and
you get these planets that are sort of
earth-like but you know three or four
times the size but what are the most
common planets in the universe the most
common planets in the universe as far as
we know are those are in orbit around a
particular type of star called a red
dwarf red dwarfs as the name suggests
are red and small and they are the most
common type of star in the universe 70%
of all the stars in the Milky Way a red
dwarfs you might say well that can't be
right because I walk out on a nice
theory night and I don't just see all
these red stars and that's because
they're so faint
even though 70% of all the stars in the
Milky Way are red dwarfs there is not a
single one you can see with your naked
eye
they're everywhere there's lots of them
in us in our 20 of the 30 nearest stars
there are some red dwarfs and you can't
see any of them do you make a dime but
these stars are very common and they
have planets going around them and
although they're quite dim and faint and
so you might think they don't want might
not produce much warmth if you put a
planet close enough to the red dwarf it
actually produces enough heat enough
light to perhaps make a planet livable
and recognizable to us so maybe this is
the scene from a planet a bit like Earth
but orbiting a red dwarf you got oceans
you've got a shoreline but everything is
red there's one way in which these
planets be very very different from
Earth though and that's as far as we can
tell the planets that we're finding
around red dwarves are what we call
tidally locked that means that they
always keep the same face towards their
parent star now we see this in our own
solar system the moon is tidally locked
to the earth the moon always keeps the
same face towards the earth the moon is
a sphere and it has stuff on the front
and the back but you can go out always
and see the moon and it always looks the
same with the same craters in the same
spots because it always keeps the same
face towards the earth we never see the
back of the moon and so a planet
orbiting a red dwarf would be tidally
locked so one side would always be
facing the red wall
and one side would always be pointing
away and so the conditions on a Red
Dwarf would be very different from Earth
you never see a sunrise or a sunset the
Sun the star never moves if you're
standing in one place
thus the light will always just sit at
one place never moving in the sky so it
will always be a tunnel daylight or
eternal darkness this is the side in
eternal darkness it's pointing away from
the star facing into space and so this
side of this planet would be
unbelievably cold and perhaps
uninhabitable and depending on how close
it is to the star this side face right
above it where the red dwarf is right
here it might be very hot and unpleasant
and so it might there might only be sort
of a narrow band here which actually is
livable this ways too hot this Way's too
cold but there's going to be somewhere
in a band on the red dwarf planet that
might be just right we found these
planets and we think that's hardly
locked and maybe they look like this but
how do we actually know that these red
dwarves planets actually have life on
them and that gets really really hard
the way we could do it is to look at the
color of the planet because what happens
is the molecules that correspond to life
actually block out Swallow very specific
shades of very specific colors a more
technical way of saying it is if you
take a spectrum of one of these
exoplanets there'll be very specific
colors missing and if the right colors
are missing that would be the signature
of life and we call those signatures bio
signatures and here is sort of a
simplified version of a spectrum so this
is the brightness of the planet versus
color going from indigo through to red
and this is how much signal you've
getting and so you can see that there
are these particular places where the
colors particular shades like this
particular shade of red or this
particular shade of green are missing
and if the right shades are missing that
means that things like photosynthesis or
or methane or ozone are in the
atmosphere of these planets and to the
best of our knowledge those would be the
seniors of life so the goal is to make a
spectrum to look at the colors of that
exoplanet very very carefully and see
the signatures and the molecules that
might correspond to life but this is
really hard this is sort of an artist a
simplified artists impression if you do
a computer calculation
a real spectrum might look like this so
you can see these dips these missing
colors due to the molecules that might
correspond to life so that's sort of
what it should look like and if you take
the world's very best telescopes and you
use them for incredible amounts of time
you get something that looks like these
black dots here and you can see that
this is pretty crude it doesn't look
anything like this and you really don't
want to say oh this little bump here is
proof of life it could be many many
different things so we need bigger
telescopes we need to collect more data
and get a spectra to turn the quality of
the data from this into this and so
astronomers are doing that we're
building telescopes both to go up into
space and on the ground the goal of
which will be to look for these bio
signatures so one of those telescopes
that will hopefully be launched next
year is the James Webb Space Telescope
this enormous sort of success of the
Hubble Space Telescope that will have
some capacity to look for bio signatures
and then on the ground we're building
these truly mammoth telescopes this
telescope is called the ELT which of
course stands for the extremely large
telescope I'm not making that up
the mirror is 39 metres across you can
see cars here for scale this thing is
absolutely enormous and it's being
constructed right now and it will be
ready to go in about 2025 which is not
that far away and these are the
telescopes that we hope will have the
sensitivity to see perhaps the first bio
signatures in the coming years now you
might be thinking well why are we
putting all this effort into looking for
life around these distant planets and
around other stars because we've got all
of these planets right here in our own
solar system is there any life on in our
own solar system besides Earth and the
answer is maybe we know that on earth
water is important for most forms of
life so the first thing you might ask is
is there liquid water anywhere else on
the solar system and the answer is is
that on the surface of a planet or a
moon there's perhaps only one place
where maybe there is liquid water and
that's Mars and I'll come back to Mars
in a moment but underground there's a
whole heap of moons of other of other
planets that have oceans underground and
the most spectacular one is Europa
Europa is a moon of Jupiter and it as
far as we know the entire planet is
enveloped in an underground ocean
and while you rope is quite small it's
only a few thousand climbers across its
oceans are unbelievably deep so the
average depth of the oceans on earth is
about three and a half kilometers the
depths of the oceans in Europa 60 to 150
kilometers deep and what that means that
Europa actually has twice as much water
on Europa then there is and all of Earth
so the place with the biggest oceans in
the solar system is not earth its Europa
we believe that that ocean is made of
salty liquid water and that's where life
began on earth in the oceans and so
perhaps we don't know but perhaps
beneath the crust of Europa there is
life this is just an imagination of what
might be down there we don't know
because we haven't been to that ocean
but maybe there is life on Europa
maybe it's intelligent but because it's
beneath the surface it doesn't know
about us and we don't know about it
we're very keen to find out more about
Europa and the conditions in that and so
there are space missions being prepared
that are going to go to your Oprah and
check out more one of them on the left
here is this these are both artist
impressions this is a European mission
called deuce the Jupiter icy moons
Explorer it's going to be launched in
2022 and it will arrive at Europa in
2029 and this is a NASA mission Europa
clipper it's going to be launched in
2025 and arrive in 2030 and those are
going to study Europa in great detail
and try and understand the properties of
the of the ocean and what's beneath the
crust of Europa and perhaps also send a
probe down to drill down and see what's
going on we got a surprise about a year
ago much closer to home on Mars that the
planet that's it's not a particularly
hospitable planet but it's the one that
has the conditions closest to Earth
you know it's remark Terry Ron this time
of year that there are many days in the
year when it is warmer on Mars than it
is on Waterloo
and recently the Curiosity rover found
some rocks it broke apart the rocks and
found some what are called organic
molecules or sort of molecules that are
produced there's waste products by
things like bacteria so it found things
like benzene and toluene and propane
these sort of molecules that at least on
earth are produced as a product of life
so I didn't actually find any bacteria
we don't know where those molecules came
from and maybe there's other ways to
make them but we have seen some evidence
for these molecules on Mars so maybe
there is some very simple life on Mars
so here all these ways of looking for
life bio signatures and molecules the
rest of it but there's a much easier way
you can just shortcut all these steps
and just say look if there's an alien
waving to us saying hello then the
answer is yes there is life out there
and so another thing that scientists are
doing is the search for extraterrestrial
intelligence or SETI and this involves
listening to the sky for radio signals
looking for another and alien actually
sending a message to us so it might be
Morse code it might be just something
very simple it might be a piece of music
it might be a message it might be a
complicated broadcast but scientists are
using some of the biggest radio
telescopes on the planet to search for
signals and this is an incredible needle
in a haystack problem you don't know
which star is transmitting from and you
don't know when maybe the aliens only
transmit for one hour every century we
don't know so you're really just hoping
for the best and the other big thing is
you don't know what frequency to listen
to if I went up to you and said ah check
it out there's this really good song on
the radio right now the first thing
you're going to say to me is which
station and if I say I don't know then
you're going to have to go through every
single station on the FM and AM dial
looking for my song and by the time you
get there perhaps the song is over well
that's the problem we have we have no
idea what station to listen to so you
have to cycle through every imaginable
radio frequency searching for that
signal so so far they haven't found
anything they're very transparent they
release all their results and so far
it's orders non detection there's an
established international protocol if
they do find something they will notify
they will confirm it and they will
notify the United Nations and share all
the data so it won't be some sort of
alien cover-up but what might it look
like at that moment well in science
fiction it would look something like
this this is a fabulous movie contact
with Jodie Foster all about the search
for alien life and while it's largely
based on real life Jodie Foster's
characters based on a real person Jill
tarter
this is the moment where she detects the
alien signal and we use supercomputers
look for the signal but of course
because Hollywood she's using a pair of
headphones listening to the radio signal
and the most ridiculous thing is a few
second
after the scene when she detects a
signal she whips out her walkie-talkie
and starts yelling for the controller
I'm asking them what's going on these
are the most sensitive radio telescopes
ever built the last thing you want to do
when you're looking for aliens is to use
a walkie-talkie it's just complete that
signal for the walkie talkie would
completely drown out the signal from the
aliens so this is not how we would find
it but it would actually look something
like this this is indeed an
extraterrestrial signal this is the
Voyager spacecraft which has now left
the solar system and when they are
setting up for each night to go alien
hunting the first thing they do is to
make sure that they can detect Voyager
so yes if there are aliens transmitting
you could see them and unfortunately
except Voyager they've never seen
another signal like this maybe the
reason why we haven't found anything is
because everyone around the galaxy is
listening every alien is listening and
no one is actually talking and so people
have thought about this and said well
maybe we should talk a bit and see if
anybody else can hear us and this is
called Metis
messaging to extraterrestrial
intelligence it's controversial some
people say we shouldn't be transmitting
we shouldn't be saying that aliens hey
we're here and we're super primitive and
we don't have warp drive yet because
maybe they'll say oh that looks like a
good planet to enslave but but people
have transmitted messages this is one of
the first examples of meki this was a
signal sent from puerto rico in 1974 and
because it was controversial they
decided to play it safe and they beamed
it to a star that's 25,000 light-years
away so even if they get the message
even if they respond straight away we
have 50,000 years before we have to
worry about it it's a very simple
message it shows you sort of what the
telescope looks like what humans look
like there's sort of a crude diagram of
DNA here and a bit of chemistry and so
on it's a very basic picture here's
another message this was on two space
probes that were launched in the 1970s
called pioneer there's an actual plaque
that was bolted to the spacecraft these
probes have left the solar system now
but maybe one day millions of years from
now some alien will find them so the
equivalent of the old guy on the beach
with a metal detector some alien will
find this thing and go what is this and
they will look at this Clark and go huh
they hadn't invented clothes but so this
is this is the pioneer this is the
Pioneer spacecraft it's showing you how
big humans are men and women relative
the spacecraft but controversially and
people now say maybe this was a mistake
this is a chart of the galaxy showing
you how to
the Sun and if the aliens find the Sun
that very hopefully says well they found
the Sun and here we are we are the third
planet so it's really a map saying come
and invade us the chances of these
plaques ever being found is obviously
incredibly small but here is a message
that's embedded on the Pioneer craft the
most recent space probe to leave the
solar system was New Horizons at flew
past Pluto in 2015 and passed an
incredibly distant asteroid Eric off in
2019 is now heading out into the
darkness and to play it safe it has a
few stamps it has some coins maybe their
stamp collectors you know I've always
won a one from the solar system it has
it has a bit of writing a bit a piece of
a novel which presumably aliens won't
understand and it has the names of
millions and millions of people who
volunteered it has their names engraved
onto a DVD but so we are sending out
this stuff and maybe one day millions of
years from now aliens will actually find
it okay so I hope I've convinced you
that even though we don't yet have warp
drive an aliens that the present and the
near future are incredibly exciting I am
a little bit disappointed that we don't
have our jetpacks and that we don't get
to shoot horrible aliens with our laser
guns but when I step back and think
about it I think you know reality is
still pretty amazing as a comparison to
sort of take away your disappointment
that this is not 2020 even though we
were promised the 1970s is that this is
what it would look like here is an image
taken by Canadian astronomers and so I
told you it's really hard to see
directly planets around other stars but
you can do it and this is incredible
back in 1606 or something I forget the
exact year Galileo looked at Jupiter
through a telescope and he saw the moons
of Jupiter going around Jupiter in real
time he saw a little mini solar system
the moons going around well we can do
that now with us does he's an actual
image of planets going around a real
star and so this is the actual thing
here from 2011 to 2016 we can actually
see planets orbiting other stars and
even to me that I mean if you were told
me 20 years ago we could do this and say
no no that science fiction what we can
do it
but I think perhaps to me the the thing
that's that says we really are living in
real life science fiction is the fact
that right now there is a 900 kilogram
nuclear-powered robot that has a rock
vaporizing laser traveling around Mars
and if we ask it to it actually takes a
selfie of itself so I hope I've
convinced you that in the words of JBS
Haldane the universe is not only queerer
than we suppose but queerer than we can
suppose thank you so much
you go to concave you
very good
thank you so much that was fantastic
let's open the floor to questions so the
microphone is right there you can just
form a line if you have some questions
all right you get going and I'm gonna
look for online questions and you you
win the race you're first hey there so
you mentioned that we're able to isolate
and detect these exoplanets through
transit signals and you also mention the
bio signatures that we can find off of
them so what's the process from going
from this one little blip that we get in
transit to finding an entire bio
signature from that one little blip it's
really hard so when what you can do is
you can take a spectrum of the star when
there's nothing going on when the
planets not going in front of it and
then you take another spectrum of the
star when the planet is going in front
of them and if you take the difference
between those two spectra the star goes
away and you're left with the planet but
you've got to remember the planner is
billions of times fainter than the star
so even the slightest error in the
subtraction will completely wipe out the
signal plus the signal is really really
faint so you have to stare not just at
one blip but hundreds of these blips
over and over again and add them all up
and slowly build up the signal and even
when you do that the spectra are not
very spectacular at the moment so it's
really just a case of gathering up huge
amounts of light from these blips you
have to know exactly what time they're
going to happen and you and you have to
get it over and over again and it's hard
because suppose the blip happens every
eight hours okay so so you get one say
at midnight and you go great I've got
that one but the next one's at 8 a.m.
the Sun's up you can't do that one the
next one's at 4 p.m. you can't do that
one either so I'm often the periods of
the blips don't even match up to when
it's nighttime and you miss out on a lot
of them so it's really really hard work
and it requires not just a lot of
scientific understanding but incredible
technical skills to get these very weak
signals out of the data so far we have
not detected one of these bio signatures
that telescopes aren't big enough but
we've demonstrated the technology
there's a lot of world leaders of doing
this technique right here in Canada and
once we have these huge telescopes going
there's a very real chance that we'll be
able to do this the first detection will
be really controversial to be very
marginal and some people won't believe
it this is the way science works but
eventually they'll be one that's a
little bit more convincing and some
one else will reproduce it with a
different telescope and men will see the
same thing around a difference though
and people will start to believe that we
actually have detected these bio
signatures take another question in the
theater thank you for your talk
aliens Roswell New Mexico
yes no maybe I think the answer is no I
think I think you've seen how difficult
is to travel to other stars if you are
going to travel from to Earth from a
different star you know why you're gonna
come all this way and then just sort of
dissect a cowl or something you know
you're going to do something more with
it note that there used to be all these
claims of aliens and strange lights in
the sky you know and then by the time
someone else looked it would be gone
every person you know in this continent
now has you know a phone that can take
movies and and all the rest of it so if
there were aliens making these strange
visitations there'd be you know really
convincing footage of it popping up on
YouTube scientists with credibility
would be seeing these things you know
none of that has happened all of these
claims disappeared since everyone's has
a phone in their pocket there's just no
evidence this has ever happened I'm
afraid 1948 no phones thank you
let me take one online which feels like
a nice physics question with the ion
drive eventually turned positive after
emitting negatively charged particles so
it's it's emitting ions which are
positively charged particles but that
creates electrons electrons are just
electrons a much lighter and they just
sort of discarded so so no so yes by
emitting ions you're creating negative
charge but you just discard that throw
that out of the window that's a good
question yeah but the amount of fuel
obviously slowly shrinks so they are the
the the NASA Dawn probe that I mentioned
it went as I said it went through four
hundred kilograms of fuel in 11 years so
that's pretty good mileage it took 11
years to burn through 400 kilograms of
fuels so it's incredibly fuel efficient
but as I said really really slow and
gentle perfect inside hello hi I'm Moony
I'm also every big fan of science
fiction's so my actually two short
questions first one is it didn't talk
about parallel universe how physics and
Astro Astro physics they look at the
parallel universe and the second one is
it's bit funny because we have seen in
in the last 50 or years there were many
rumors about UFO Bermuda Triangle and
all that but nowadays we don't hear
anything like that what's the reason for
that so I think I think the answer the
second question is is that you know
people can't just as I said before
people can't just say I saw a light
anymore you know if they saw something
they would have taken a photo of it and
they're just everyone has a camera and
there's nothing out there it was easy to
make things up when you we didn't have
to prove it the answer to your first
question
so the question is you know what does
physics have to say about parallel
universes is that the question so yes so
there's lots of great science fiction
about parallel universes some of which
are very similar to ours and some of
which are very different you know it's
controversial physics says that parallel
universes can exist but so far we
haven't found any way to actually prove
that that is happening quantum mechanics
which is a branch of physics that allows
electronics to work one interpretation
of what quantum mechanics is is that
it's actually a continuous creation of
of new branching universes something
called the many-worlds hypothesis that's
one interpretation of quantum mechanics
people have been arguing about this for
decades but so far we haven't had any
way to prove it there are some claims
that you could actually see another
universe bumping into ours by the faint
glow in the sky called the Cosmic
Microwave Background but none of this is
really borne out so it's valid physics
and people have conferences and write
scientific articles about parallel
universes all the time but right now we
don't have any way to to test that to
know that they exist let alone actually
you sort of look at them or jump between
them let's take one more in the theater
and then the remaining theater questions
you can get them after and I have one
online to finish up so you're up thank
you very much I'm just wondering when
you were talking about warp drive in
different ways of traveling through
through space and you mentioned things
like you know if we go 20% the speed of
light and then you you said if we could
go 99% the speed of light
you never mentioned going the speed of
light so I guess I'm wondering based on
what we know now it's that possible is
it possible to go multiple times the
speed of light and if so what would it
take to do that
so we the only way you can travel the
speed of light is as a light beam so I
did actually talk about traveling at the
speed of light though I didn't actually
say it explicitly
and that's teleportation if you break me
up into information and transmit me in a
radio wave I'm essentially traveling at
the speed of light and so I could travel
to a star that's four light-years away
in four years and then get reassembled
at the other end as long as you get
around these minor problems of the
amount of data and transmission speeds
but that is traveling at the speed of
light no actual object can ever travel
the speed of light that's forbidden by
the laws of physics but information can
travel at the speed of light indeed
every time you talk on your cell phone
or listen to the radio you are receiving
information that has traveled to you at
the speed of light the question other
question you asked is can we travel
faster than the speed of light and the
answer yeah the short answer that is no
like that the laws of physics forbid
anything from traveling faster than the
speed of light if you use warp drive
then maybe you could drag space at
faster than the speed of light in at
least that's what happens in Star Wars
and Star Trek that's not actually moving
at all it's just dragging space so maybe
that would be a way to effectively move
faster than the speed of light
all sorts of paradoxes happen if you can
do this you could actually travel back
in time and then you know the usual
story of you or you could kill your
grandfather but if your grandfather's
dead then would you be born how could
you do that so I think the short answer
is is that all sorts of inconsistencies
come up if you could work out a way to
travel faster than the speed of light
and might there might be clever
exceptions to that rule but as far as we
know the fastest you can travel is
exactly the speed of light thank you and
let's take one last online question what
was your favorite sci-fi movie as a kid
[Music]
that's a great question III know I can
answer the movie of what my favorites
are for me as an adult but as a kid look
it's hard to go past the original Star
Wars movie I actually saw it at the
drive-in so I know that makes me
probably pretty old but but uh you know
seeing that movie I mean the special
effects of Star Wars were like nothing
we had ever seen at the time the story
was amazing the special effects the
baddies were the perfect villains and
the good guys are the perfect good guys
like like a lot of other people grew up
in the 70s you know Star Wars has
completely shaped my thinking like I
wanted Star Wars and you know every
research paper I write hopefully is one
more step towards making that happen
that sounds great
ladies and gentlemen dr. Brian
[Applause]
[Music]